
# Table of Contents

1.  [Meta-Data](#orgc4fad4b)
    1.  [State Overview](#org8b7f3f0)
    2.  [Data Source](#orga79704d)
    3.  [Election Metadata](#org565fe1e)
    4.  [Offices Covered](#orgaa86dd9)
    5.  [Results Breakdown](#orgef2ade7)
    6.  [Notes](#org76683aa)
2.  [Target Format](#org7372d55)
    1.  [Common Fields in Results files](#org0596032)
    2.  [Comment about tidy data](#org5430c07)
3.  [Data Transformation Strategy](#org3f42d79)
    1.  [Special considerations for Sarpy County](#orgdeb2b13)
4.  [R Script to Read, Transform, and Write 2014 Results](#org7d1eebb)



<a id="orgc4fad4b"></a>

# Meta-Data


<a id="org8b7f3f0"></a>

## State Overview

-   Name State: Nebraska
-   Metadata Status:  up-to-date as of March 30, 2018
-   Overview Field: state data gathering process was easy, 2014 data
    provided by OpenElections on
    <https://github.com/openelections/openelections-data-ne>.  Not sure
    where that data came from.


<a id="orga79704d"></a>

## Data Source

-   Organization: 2014 data in Excel files by county
    provided by OpenElections on
    <https://github.com/openelections/openelections-data-ne>.  Not sure
    where that data came from. But also see
    <http://www.sos.ne.gov/elec/2014/results/2014-General-Canvass-Recount-Final.pdf>
-   Portal Link: <http://www.sos.ne.gov/dyindex.html#boxingName>
-   Direct Link: 2014 data in Excel files by county
    provided by OpenElections on
    <https://github.com/openelections/openelections-data-ne>.  Not sure
    where that data came from. But also see
    <http://www.sos.ne.gov/elec/2014/results/2014-General-Canvass-Recount-Final.pdf>
-   Reults Type: Certified results by county at 
    <http://www.sos.ne.gov/elec/2014/results/2014-General-Canvass-Recount-Final.pdf>
    I am not sure of the results type of the Excel files from
    OpenElections used as the
    source of the data transformation.
-   Formats:  2014 data in Excel files by county
    provided by OpenElections on
    <https://github.com/openelections/openelections-data-ne>.


<a id="org565fe1e"></a>

## Election Metadata

-   Start and end date: Start: November 4, 2014, End: November 4, 2014
-   Race type: General
-   Special:   No
-   Primary Type: Not Applicable
-   Primary Note: Not Applicable
-   Absentee and Provisional:  Result files include vote counts for these types: Yes!


<a id="orgaa86dd9"></a>

## Offices Covered

-   President:  No
-   US Senate: Yes
-   US House: Yes
-   Governor: Yes
-   State Officers: Yes
-   State Legislators: Unicameral State Senators.  Note that the
    Legislature is composed of 49 members, chosen by a single-member
    district or constituency. Senators are chosen for four-year terms,
    with one-half of the seats up for election every second year.


<a id="orgef2ade7"></a>

## Results Breakdown

-   Race-wide:  No top-level tabulation, use statistical or spreadsheet
    software for totaling, sub-totaling, etc.
-   County:  Yes, results are tabulated by county.
-   Precinct:  Yes,  results are tabulated by precinct.
-   Congressional District: Yes, presidential or statewide offices are
    tabulated by Congressional district
-   State legislative: Presidential and statewide offices are NOT
    tabulated by state legislative district
-   Note:  Not applicable, no notes.


<a id="org76683aa"></a>

## Notes

1.  Congressional Districts in Sarpy County

    Sarpy County is the only Nebraska county which is split over two
    congressional districts, specifically Precinct 1, Precinct 2,
    Precinct 3, Precinct 4, Precinct 5, Precinct 6, Precinct 7,
    Precinct 8, Precinct 9, Precinct 10, Precinct 11, Precinct 12,
    Precinct 13, Precinct 16, Precinct 17, Precinct 18, Precinct 19,
    Precinct 20, Precinct 21, Precinct 22, Precinct 24, Precinct 25,
    Precinct 26 of Sarpy County are in Congressional District 1, the
    reminder are in Congressional District 2.  All other Nebraska
    counties are completely in Nebraska Congressional District 1 or
    Nebraska Congressional District 3.  Douglas County and parts of
    Sarpy County make up Congressional District 2.

2.  Maps for Nebraska Legislative Districts

    A comprehensive map of Nebraska Legislative Disstricts, relative to
    Nebraska counties, is at
    <https://www.nebraskalegislature.gov/about/leg_map.php>
    Scroll down the page for the finer details about the Omaha, Lincoln
    and Grand Island district outlines.   Maps are available in several
    formats, including shapefiles.

3.  Sarpy County Precincts Split over Congressional Districts

    Precincts 19 and 21 in Sarpy County are split over Congressional
    District 1 and Congressional District 2.  No finer reporting of
    the election results are provided, so these two precincts get
    reported with vote totals twice, once for each
    congressional race.  The correct Congressional District is noted
    for that race for those precincts.  This is accomplished by
    hand-editing of the CSV for those precincts for those
    congressional races only. 

4.  Counties with no races for Legislature

    Note that the Legislature is composed of 49 members, chosen by a
    single-member district or constituency. Senators are chosen for
    four-year terms, with one-half of the seats up for election every
    second year.  Many counties, particularly in the rural and western
    parts of Nebraska are completely subsumed in one legislative
    district.  As a consequence of these two facts, some counties have
    no races for Legislature.

5.  Legislature Districts occupying parts of two counties

    Legislative districts 2,19, 22, 23, 30, 32, 33, 34, 36, 38, 43, 47
    occupy parts but not all of some of the counties that they span.

6.  Counties with Multiple Legislative Districts

    Some populous counties have multiple Legislative Districts
    contined within them, for example, Douglas, Sarpy and Lancaster.
    Because Senators are chosen for four-year terms, with one-half of
    the seats up for election every second year, these counties with
    multiple Legislative Districts will have some precincts reporting
    a positive number of votes, usually in the tens or hundreds of
    votes for a real race and some precincts in the Legislative
    Districts not up for election reporting 0 votes.  Also, in the
    original data provided in excel spreadhseet format, the
    spreadsheet cells corresponding to the precincts with another
    district&rsquo;s race are reported with 0 votes.  In principle, the
    precincts reporting 0 votes should be ignored, or maybe marked
    with NA or similar signifier.  At this time, it is not obvious how
    to algorithmically distinguish a non-voting precinct from a voting
    precinct which truly gave 0 votes to a candidate, so I have left
    the non-voting precincts reported with 0 votes.  This is also
    consistent with my reading of the guidance in
    <http://docs.openelections.net/common-fields/>
    
    As an example, consider Precinct 1 in Sarpy County, which reports
    0 in all races for LD0002, LD0003, and LD0014 occuring in 2014.
    This is because Precinct 1 is not in any of the 3 Legislative
    Districts with an actual race.

7.  Multiple reporting of Precincts

    Because of the way the data is provided in rows by precinct and
    columns for multiple Legislaive districts in the
    original data provided in excel spreadhseet format, the
    spreadsheet cells corresponding to the precincts with another
    district&rsquo;s race are reported with 0 votes.  In principle, the
    precincts reporting 0 votes should be ignored, or maybe marked
    with NA or similar signifier.  At this time, it is not obvious how
    to algorithmically distinguish a non-voting precinct from a voting
    precinct which truly gave 0 votes to a candidate, so I have left
    the non-voting precincts reported with 0 votes.  This is also
    consistent with my reading of the guidance in
    <http://docs.openelections.net/common-fields/> 


<a id="org7372d55"></a>

# Target Format


<a id="org0596032"></a>

## Common Fields in Results files

From <http://docs.openelections.net/common-fields/>: Each election year
represents a directory containing data files covering elections
occurring in that year. Each election held during that year contains
one record for each candidate listed in the results. The resulting
CSV-file records consist of these fields: county, precinct, office,
district, party, candidate, votes.  The OpenElections CSV layout
approach is to mirror the results file as much as possible, with one
exception: we try to have a single result on each line, rather than
multiple candidates or precincts.


<a id="org5430c07"></a>

## Comment about tidy data

General comment:  The format specified in the section &ldquo;Common Fields
in Results Files&rdquo; seems to conform to the tidyverse
conventions as I understand them.


<a id="org3f42d79"></a>

# Data Transformation Strategy

1.  Download or clone the sources which contain 93 .xls files by county.
2.  Loop over all 93 counties.
3.  Open each xls file by county name.
4.  Loop over the Office names I want to compile.  From spot-checks of
    Adams.xls and Douglas.xls I see that each election block ends with
    a row labeled Totals.  I use a grep to locate the line numbers of
    these.  It also appears that each Excel file reports all list the
    major races in the same order, starting with Senator, then
    Representative, etc, so I can use a grep to find those row numbers,
    then search for the next Total and the grep from the Office to the
    grep with the corresponding Total will delimit the beginning and
    ending boundaries of the office block.
5.  The election results start in the next Excel column after the
    precincts.  The election results for each precinct and each race
    are totaled in a Totals column, so after a grep on Totals I can use
    that as a delimiter, right and left for the races. Some counties
    have several distinct races by district for some offices.  When
    this occurs, make a list of the outcome block columns and loop over
    this list of blocks.
6.  The initial transformation to get the data in the right format is to
    &ldquo;gather()&rdquo; the election data block, using the gather function from the
    tidyverse package tidyr.
7.  Clean up and arrange column names.
8.  To get the congressional districts, I hand-made a list which
    associates each county to its congressional district.  I can use
    this associative list to fill the district column for each race.
    This works well except for Sarpy county which is split between
    District 1 and District 2.  For that exceptional county, I have to
    use an additional hand-curated list that names each precinct in
    Congressional District 1.  (It seems
    that I should be able to read out this information from the
    spreadsheet.  While the information is  available in the portion of
    the spreadsheet that has the Representative Races, it is buried in
    an awkward place.  To extract seems to be more work than this
    hand-curated way.  However, note that if the districts change by
    either whole counties or individual precincts, that change will
    require hand-curation of the associative lists.)
9.  Clean up the candidate and party into separate columns.  Add the
    county, dsitrict and office columns.  Rearrange into the proper order.
10. Write into a csv file named appropriately according to directions.


<a id="orgdeb2b13"></a>

## Special considerations for Sarpy County

1.  I want to associate a congressional district with each office
    election, even if the office does not involve congressional
    districts.  For instance, it might be interesting to calculate
    results for the Senate or Governor race by congressional district.
    For that, I need to know the congressional district on each line.
2.  Right now, with the way I collect the data using the tidyverse
    gatehr construction over the whole width of the data, a candidate
    running for congressinal district will have 0 for votes in in
    precincts in the
    district where they are *not* running!  In some ways, this is no
    harm.  But it could be misleading for averages over precincts.
3.  In principle, I could transform the data for the races for
    congressional representative into block matrix structure.  Once in
    block matrix structure, I could separately consider the sub-matrix blocks and 
    extract the tidy format data for the races as I do for the otehr races.  In doing so, I would
    *not* have 0 votes for a congressional candidate not running in
    that district.  In doing so, I might be able to extract the
    district from the heading and fill it in along the other data, like
    candidate names and so forth.  That is, I wouldn&rsquo;t have extraneous lines in the
    csv file.  I would also be filling in the district on the
    congressinal representative races automatically.  But the big down
    side is that I would *not* have district data for the other races.
4.  So the way around this is to make an associative list of the Sarpy
    County precincts with what congressional district they are in, and
    then after filling *all* the districts with congressional district
    2, go back and correct the precincts using the associateive list.
5.  This still leaves the question of what to do with Precinct 19 and
    Precinct 21 which have blocks in District 1 and District 2.


<a id="org7d1eebb"></a>

# R Script to Read, Transform, and Write 2014 Results

      library(readxl) # needed for read_excel
      library(tidyr)  # needed for gather
      library(reshape2) # needed for colsplit
      library(dplyr) # needed for filter
      library(readr) # needed for write_csv
    
      findOfficeStartRow <- function(DF, office) {
          row <- which(apply(DF, 1, function(x) any(grepl(office, x))))
          return(row[1] + 1)  # the desired block is first instance of office
    			  # block starts in the next row
      }
    
      findTotalsRows <- function(DF) {
          return( which(apply(DF, 2, function(x) grepl("Total", x))))
      } # this function is only used inside the findOfficeEndRow function
    
      findOfficeEndRow <- function(DF, office) {
          start <- findOfficeStartRow(DF, office)
          totalsRows <- findTotalsRows(DF)
          endrow <- min(totalsRows[ totalsRows > start ])
          return(endrow - 1) # don't include the Totals row
      }
    
      findTotalsColumns <- function(DF, office) {
          sr <- findOfficeStartRow(DF, office)
          return( which(apply(countyDF[sr,], 1, function(x) grepl("Total", x))))
      }
    
      findOfficeLeftBlocks <- function(DF, office) {
          tc <- findTotalsColumns(DF, office)
          return <- c(2, tc[-length(tc)]+1)   # prepend 2, drop last column,
    					  # return each next column
      }
    
      findOfficeRightBlocks <- function(DF, office) {
          tc <- findTotalsColumns(DF, office)
          return( tc-1 )  # return each previous column
      }
    
      neCounties <- c("Adams", "Antelope", "Arthur", "Banner", "Blaine",
    	    "Boone", "Box Butte", "Boyd", "Brown", "Buffalo",
    	    "Burt", "Butler", "Cass", "Cedar", "Chase", "Cherry",
    	    "Cheyenne", "Clay", "Colfax", "Cuming", "Custer",
    	    "Dakota", "Dawes", "Dawson", "Deuel", "Dixon",
    	    "Dodge", "Douglas", "Dundy", "Fillmore", "Franklin",
    	    "Frontier", "Furnas", "Gage", "Garden", "Garfield",
    	    "Gosper", "Grant", "Greeley", "Hall", "Hamilton",
    	    "Harlan", "Hayes", "Hitchcock", "Holt", "Hooker",
    	    "Howard", "Jefferson", "Johnson", "Kearney", "Keith",
    	    "Keya Paha", "Kimball", "Knox", "Lancaster",
    	    "Lincoln", "Logan", "Loup", "McPherson", "Madison",
    	    "Merrick", "Morrill", "Nance", "Nemaha", "Nuckolls",
    	    "Otoe", "Pawnee", "Perkins", "Phelps", "Pierce",
    	    "Platte", "Polk", "Red Willow", "Richardson", "Rock",
    	    "Saline", "Sarpy", "Saunders", "Scotts Bluff",
    	    "Seward", "Sheridan", "Sherman", "Sioux", "Stanton",
    	    "Thayer", "Thomas", "Thurston", "Valley",
    	    "Washington", "Wayne", "Webster", "Wheeler", "York")
    
      congDist <- list("Adams"=3, "Antelope"=3, "Arthur"=3,
    		   "Banner"=3, "Blaine"=3, "Boone"=3, "Box Butte"=3,
    		   "Boyd"=3, "Brown"=3, "Buffalo"=3, "Burt"=1, "Butler"=1,
    		   "Cass"=1, "Cedar"=3, "Chase"=3, "Cherry"=3,
    		   "Cheyenne"=3, "Clay"=3, "Colfax"=1, "Cuming"=1, "Custer"=3,
    		   "Dakota"=3, "Dawes"=3, "Dawson"=3, "Deuel"=3,
    		   "Dixon"=3, "Dodge"=1, "Douglas"=2, "Dundy"=3,
    		   "Fillmore"=3, "Franklin"=3, "Frontier"=3, "Furnas"=3,
    		   "Gage"=3, "Garden"=3, "Garfield"=3, "Gosper"=3,
    		   "Grant"=3, "Greeley"=3,
    		   "Hall"=3, "Hamilton"=3, "Harlan"=3,
    		   "Hayes"=3, "Hitchcock"=3, "Holt"=3, "Hooker"=3, "Howard"=3,
    		   "Jefferson"=3, "Johnson"=3,
    		   "Kearney"=3, "Keith"=3, "Keya Paha"=3, "Kimball"=3,
    		   "Knox"=3,
    		   "Lancaster"=1, "Lincoln"=3, "Logan"=3, "Loup"=3,
    		   "McPherson"=3, "Madison"=1, "Merrick"=3, "Morrill"=3,
    		   "Nance"=3, "Nemaha"=3, "Nuckolls"=3,
    		   "Otoe"=1,
    		   "Pawnee"=3, "Perkins"=3, "Phelps"=3, "Pierce"=3,
    		   "Platte"=1, "Polk"=1,
    		   "Red Willow"=3, "Richardson"=3, "Rock"=3,
    		   "Saline"=3, "Sarpy"=2, "Saunders"=1,
    		   "Scotts Bluff"=3, "Seward"=1,
    		   "Sheridan"=3, "Sherman"=3, "Sioux"=3, "Stanton"=1,
    		   "Thayer"=3, "Thomas"=3, "Thurston"=1,
    		   "Valley"=3,
    		   "Washington"=1, "Wayne"=3, "Webster"=3, "Wheeler"=3,
    		   "York"=3)
    
      congDist1Sarpy <- list("Precinct 1$", "Precinct 2$", "Precinct 3$", 
    			"Precinct 4$", "Precinct 5$", "Precinct 6$", 
    			"Precinct 7$", "Precinct 8$", "Precinct 9$", 
    			"Precinct 10$", "Precinct 11$", "Precinct 12$", 
    			"Precinct 13$", "Precinct 16$", "Precinct 17$", 
    			"Precinct 18$", "Precinct 19$", "Precinct 20$",
    			"Precinct 21$", "Precinct 22$", "Precinct 24$",
    			"Precinct 25$", "Precinct 26$")
    # in 2014 election there was no Precent 14 or 15.  Precinct 23 is in District 2
    # Note that parts of District 19 and 21 are in BOTH District 1 and District 2!
    
      offices <- c("Senator",
    	       "Representative",
    	       "Governor",
    	       "Secretary of State",
    	       "State Treasurer",
    	       "Attorney General",
    	       "Auditor",
    	       "Legislature"
      )
    
      for (county in neCounties) {
    
         countyPrecinctResults <- data.frame(county=character(),
    					  precinct=character(),
    					  office=character(),
    					  district=character(),
    					  candidate=character(),
    					  party=character(),
    					  votes=integer()
         ) # initialize data frame for the tidy form of county results
    	# Note that this is not the final column order, a reorder comes later. 
    
         fname <- paste0(county, ".xls") # note use of paste0
         countyDF <- suppressWarnings(read_excel(fname, col_types = "text"))
         # In some counties, e.g. Douglas, with multiple districts for
         # Legislature or the Natural Resource Districts, the strings in
         # race heading rows and list of candidates appear in columns
         # which previously were empty or had other variable types.  This
         # causes read_excel to issue many warning messages.  One guard to
         # fix this is to explicitly declare col_types as text.  I
         # additionally wrap the read_excel() with suppressWarnings() to
         # eliminate the warnings.
    
          for (office in offices) {
    	  if (as.logical(sum(grepl(office, countyDF)))) {
    	  # check to see if county has an office race;
    	  # if TRUE, proceed
    
    	 startRow <- findOfficeStartRow(countyDF, office)
    	 endRow <- findOfficeEndRow(countyDF, office)
    	 leftBlocks <- findOfficeLeftBlocks(countyDF, office)
    	 rightBlocks <- findOfficeRightBlocks(countyDF, office)
    	 if (office == "Legislature") {
    	     districtsLD <- 
    		 sub("For Member of the Legislature - ", "", 
    		     grep("LD*", countyDF[startRow-1,], value=TRUE))
    	 }
    
    	 for (race in 1:length(leftBlocks)) {
    	     leftEdge <- leftBlocks[race]
    	     rightEdge <- rightBlocks[race] 
    
    	     cands <- c("precinct",
    			unname(unlist(countyDF[startRow,leftEdge:rightEdge])))
    
    	     officeResults <- countyDF[(startRow+1):endRow, leftEdge:rightEdge]
    					# careful with operator precedence!
    	     officeResults <- cbind(countyDF[(startRow+1):endRow, 1], officeResults)
    
    
    	     colnames(officeResults) <- cands
    
    	     # here is the tidyverse magic that turns the spreadsheet
    	     # array into tidy data
    	     officeTibble <-
    		 gather(officeResults, key=candparty, value=votes, -precinct)
    
    	     newColNames <- c("candidate", "party")
    	     newCols <- colsplit(officeTibble$candparty, " \r\n", newColNames)
    	     newCols$candidate <- gsub("[ ]+", " ", newCols$candidate)
    	     # many names have two spaces between first and last,
    	     # seems inconvenient for search so clean it up here with
    	     # a substitution
    
    	     officeTibble <- cbind(officeTibble, newCols)
    	     officeTibble$candparty <- NULL
    	     # eliminate the old candidate and party combined column
    
    	     officeTibble$county <- rep(county, NROW(officeTibble))
    	     officeTibble$office <- rep(office, NROW(officeTibble))
    
    	     if (office == "Legislature") {
    		 officeTibble$district <-
    		     rep(districtsLD[race], NROW(officeTibble))
    	     } else { 
    		 officeTibble$district <-
    		     rep(congDist[[county]], NROW(officeTibble))
    	       if (county == "Sarpy")  {
    	       for (precinct in congDist1Sarpy) {
    		   rowsPrecinct <- grep(precinct, officeTibble$precinct)
    		   officeTibble$district[rowsPrecinct] <- 1 
    	       }    # fix the 23 precincts in Sarpy that 
    		   # are actually in Congressional District 1
    	       }
    	     }
    
    	     # reorder columns
    	     officeTibble <- officeTibble[c("county", "precinct", "office", 
    				 "district", "party", "candidate", "votes")]
    
    	     countyPrecinctResults <- rbind(countyPrecinctResults, officeTibble)
    	     # append current office results to the county results
    	 }
          }
         # convert votes column to integer, got read in as chr, somehow, somewhere
    	 countyPrecinctResults$votes <- as.numeric(countyPrecinctResults$votes)
         }   
         lcCounty <- tolower(gsub(" ", "_", county))
         csvName <- paste0("20141104_ne_general_", lcCounty, "_precinct.csv")
         write_csv(countyPrecinctResults, csvName)
      }

